Hello everyone.
Welcome to Advanced Website
Development Techniques.
[Transcript missing]
and these talks are going to
cover both Safari and how to make
use of it using HTML and making
documents for Safari and WebKit,
the engine inside Safari.
All right,
advanced website development techniques.
What exactly are we talking about here?
We're talking about techniques
for web applications,
for more advanced sites that
aren't just a collection of
web pages and web documents,
that really go beyond that to
give the user a richer experience.
They're particularly useful
for data-intensive and
highly interactive sites.
All of these techniques that I'm going
to discuss today work in Safari and
other webkit-based applications.
And many are also supported
in other browsers,
and I'll try to mention
throughout the talk which are
supported in which browsers.
and finally, we're going to have really
in-depth coverage here today.
We're going to go through a lot
of code samples and hopefully
by the time you leave this talk,
you should know how to use all of these
techniques in your own web applications.
What are we going to cover specifically?
First, LiveConnect,
a technique that you can use to
communicate between JavaScript on
the page and Java applets.
We're going to talk about drag and drop,
how to do drag and drop in your
web pages two different ways.
We're going to talk about HTML editing
and how to use that inside your
own web pages for pieces of the
document to make them editable.
We're going to talk about XmlHttpRequest,
which is a technique you can use
for backend server communication.
And finally, we'll talk a little about
putting it all together and
how to combine these techniques
to make a good web application.
and don't forget,
this stuff is also really
useful for dashboard widgets.
So if you want to win that
PowerBook or that iPod,
pay attention.
The first topic we're going
to cover is LiveConnect.
Now,
LiveConnect is kind of a catch-all term.
People use it to refer
to many different things.
But in Safari, when we say LiveConnect,
we mean Java-to-JavaScript communication.
Some of you may be interested
in plugin scriptability.
If so, make sure to catch the Plugin
Development for WebKit and Safari session
later during this conference.
What's LiveConnect good for exactly,
you may wonder?
Well, one thing it's good for is you can
connect to existing Java applets.
If you already have a Java applet
around that does something useful
and you'd really like to integrate
that functionality into your webpage,
then LiveConnect can be a good
way to go instead of trying
to totally reimplement it.
It's also good for going beyond
what you can really practically
do in JavaScript and HTML.
Web technologies are really great,
but JavaScript is a fairly slow
interpreted language and there's certain
things that just won't cut it for it.
For example, 3D graphics.
That's a little beyond what
you can do with JavaScript,
but with Java you can do it.
and Kevin DeCroix have been
working on the development of
the latest web applications.
This session is for web developers
who want the latest information
about developing highly interactive
data-intensive web applications
using XmlHttpRequest objects,
LiveConnect,
and forms with rich text content.
Here's a very simple diagram
of how LiveConnect works.
JavaScript in your page
can call the Java applet,
and the Java applet can call
JavaScript in your page.
That's it.
It's all there is to it.
It's very straightforward.
So let's look at a simple code example.
To talk to a JavaScript applet,
you just get the object for it
out of the applets array and
start making method calls on it,
like this.
You may notice I've put the may
script attribute on the applet
tag here to make it scriptable,
and then later from JavaScript,
just start calling methods.
So let's see a little demo.
I'm going to have Kevin Decker come
up here to the stage to help me out.
Hi, Maciej.
Hey, Kevin.
Hi.
OK, so what we have here
is we have this applet,
which is right here.
Wait for them to put it on screen.
All right.
There we go.
And I'm going to go ahead and start
the applet and show you what it does.
[Transcript missing]
So this applet was
actually created by NASA.
It lets you make your own custom 3D
models and specify them in JavaScript,
and then Java does the animation.
So I can imagine lots of cool
things you could do with this.
You could have controls in the webpage
that let you set up what exactly the
model is and then use Java to animate it.
All right.
That's all there is to it.
LiveConnect.
Back to slides.
and if you're interested in
learning more about LiveConnect,
there's a Nutscape LiveConnect overview
available at this extremely long URL.
I'll go over the documentation
URLs again at the end of the talk.
The next topic we're going
to discuss is drag and drop.
All right.
Drag and drop support.
In the latest Safari in
the Tiger WWDC seed,
we have much better
drag and drop support.
And when you use drag-and-drop
in your web application,
you can get sort of more of a desktop
native app feel in your web application.
We provide a more convenient
API for drag-and-drop.
And we'll even let you
drag between windows,
including between different applications.
We're going to talk about two
different techniques for drag and drop.
The first technique is
mouse event-based dragging.
This just uses the classic
JavaScript mouse events,
mouse down, mouse up, mouse move,
and so on, to simulate a drag.
and you can use this to drag or
resize elements inside a page.
Again, as I said,
it uses the standard mouse handlers.
And it's really only
good for in-page drag.
You can't use this to drag
between different frames
or to drag to other apps.
We're also going to talk about
advanced drag-and-drop events.
Now, these events give you a lot more
detailed control over the drag and
let you do much fancier things.
They let you provide a custom
drag image if you want,
custom drag types,
like you can specify whether you're
dragging text or URL and so forth.
And they let you drag between frames,
between windows, between applications.
So first let's talk about drag
and drop using mouse events.
The first thing you have to do
to do this is add a mouse down
handler to the appropriate element.
It's very simple, just like this.
One other thing I've highlighted here
besides just the mouse handler is that
the element is absolute positioned.
It's important to use some kind of
positioning on the element so that
when you actually change the position,
it'll be reflected because if the
element is in the normal HTML flow,
then the position attributes
will have no effect.
So the mouse down handler first saves
the initial position of the mouse cursor.
It wants to know where the mouse
cursor is relative to the element,
so when you finally do the drop,
you can correctly
compute the new position.
And this is just some simple math here.
Next, it temporarily installs
an OnSelect handler.
This is just to prevent accidental
text selection from happening
while you're doing the drag,
since this is just keying off the
normal mouse event and needs to make
sure to prevent the default action.
Now, OnSelect Start is supported
in Internet Explorer,
but in Mozilla,
this event is not defined.
Having a handler for it
will make no difference,
but the way to actually prevent
selection is to return false
from the mousedown event handler.
And here's the example.
Very simple.
We've got the function defined here,
and we add an event listener
using the standard DOM call
highlighted in orange there.
All right.
There's more.
Next, you install mouse move
and mouse up handlers.
And these just compute the new position
and place the element right there.
So here it goes.
Here I'm showing you the move handler,
and the up handler is doing
pretty much the same thing.
Again,
it's got that initial saved position.
Now, I'm using a trick here called
nested functions in JavaScript.
If you define one function inside
another and then attach it as a handler,
it actually has access to the
parameters of the nested function.
So this way we have access to
this initial event and also to
the initial offset variables that
I defined a couple of slides ago.
And you'll be able to see more
of this in the code samples
once they are downloadable.
And finally, the mouse up handler removes
all the temporary event
handlers that you installed.
and I will be talking
about the XmlHttpRequest.
This is a technique that's used
to totally override mouse move and
mouse up handling for the whole
document temporarily during the drag.
Now let's look at a diagram of this.
I'm going to show you all the different
events that take place during the
drag and process and how they relate.
First we have the mouse down event.
And this happens on the drag source.
It's just a normal event.
And the main role for this is to add
the handlers for the other events.
Now we have all these other
events that are installed as
capturing events on the body.
We have the mouse move handler,
which sets the new position,
the mouse up handler,
which removes all these
temporary handlers,
and the Select Start Handler,
which prevents accidental text
selection during the drag.
So that's it for the
first dragging technique.
Let's go on to number two.
Drag and drop using drag events.
So drag and drop using drag
events provides a very large
number of events you can use,
but you don't really need
to hook up to most of them.
But first of all, let's start by going
over the exhaustive list.
At the drag start site where
the drag is going to originate,
you have on drag start, on drag,
and on drag end.
The way these fire is that on
drag start fires when you first
begin dragging the element.
On drag fires continuously while
you're continuing to drag it around,
and on drag end fires
when the drag completes,
either by dropping the item or
by the user canceling the drag.
On the drag target site,
you have even more events.
You have on drag enter,
which fires whenever the
drag enters the element,
which might be a possible drag target.
You have on drag over,
which fires continuously while
you're still over the element,
and you have on drag leave
when you leave the element,
without dropping, and finally,
on drop if you actually do the drop.
So let's look at how
you make use of these.
Oh, before that, I have to talk about the
data transfer object.
Attached to drag events
is a data transfer object.
This lets you set the data
to actually be dragged.
You don't have to drag just
whatever the element happens to be.
You can set any custom data.
It lets you customize the
appearance of the drag and
also other parameters about it,
like what operation is it doing?
Is it a copy, a move?
This will affect the cursor you
see while you're doing the drag.
And finally, on the receiving end,
you can actually get the data
from the data transfer object
once the drag takes place.
So now let's look at
the actual code samples.
The first thing you do is set event
drag handlers at the drag source,
like this.
I've set all three here, but again,
onDragStart is probably the only
one that's really important,
where you need to fill in the data
and set up the drag appearance,
and onDrag and onDragEnd,
as I've shown here,
you might use to give some kind
of feedback at the source while
the drag is still going on.
Now, you have to fill in the data
transfer object at the drag source.
So here's a couple of things we're doing.
We're setting a custom drag image,
not just using the default.
We're setting the type of data
and the actual data contents.
Here I've used a mime type, text plane.
In Safari, these drag events support
arbitrary mime types.
In Internet Explorer,
the only types allowed
are text and URI list,
and Safari also supports
those for compatibility.
And finally here,
I've set the drag operations allowed,
which is a copy.
So you'd see the little plus icon.
Next, you have to set the appropriate
event handlers at the drop target.
and Paul Schmitz are the main developers
of the XmlHttpRequest project.
They are the ones who are going
to be working on the development
of the XmlHttpRequest project.
And finally,
you have to use the data transfer object
at the drop site to get the data out.
Here it is.
You can do whatever you want
with it once it's dropped.
Okay, time for another diagram.
This one's going to be a little fancier.
We're going to look at first the event
handlers that you set on the drag source.
OnDragStart sets up the
data transfer object.
OnDrag can optionally show some
feedback while you're dragging.
And OnDragEnd is going
to end the feedback,
if any, that you were showing,
those last two being optional.
Then there's all the event handlers
that you might have at the drag target.
You have DragEnter,
which you get when you first enter,
and you might use that to show
some kind of feedback that this
is a valid drop target or not.
DragOver, which fires continuously
while you're over the element.
Drop, which fires only if you
actually drop inside the target.
Or alternately, you get DragLeave,
if the user leaves the element
without actually performing the drop.
So that's it.
Now let's look at a little demo here.
What we have is a shared annotation
server that lets you mark up a copy
of a webpage with little notes,
and this is going to use both
drag and drop techniques,
and again, Kevin Decker's going to help
me out with demoing this.
So this is really cool.
We've basically built in stickies
to this common website here,
so I can just drag this right here,
and I'll drag another one.
So that's showing the second
drag and drop technique,
cross frame.
The top section there is
actually a different frame.
And here we're demonstrating
the in-page drag.
That's just a normal DOM element.
We've hooked up to the
mouse events on it.
You can also resize them
using that resize corner.
and you may notice these
things are translucent.
That's using some of the new
opacity features in Safari.
And if you're interested in
more stuff like that and how to
make things look really cool,
make sure to catch Dave Hyatt's talk
on making visually compelling websites.
Okay, that's it for now.
Back to slides.
All right.
Now, again,
there's documentation on this.
There's an overview of
these custom drag events.
And we'll go back to that at the end.
The next topic I'm going to
talk about is HTML editing.
Now, I'm going to talk about
HTML editing mainly as it
applies to editing within a page,
a particular section inside a page.
Later on during this conference,
there's going to be a talk
that's currently vaguely called
Advanced WebKit Features,
which is going to cover how to use
editing from your own custom app if you
want to use it the way mail is going to,
for instance.
So you can use this to support
rich text editing in web pages.
Now one of the most obvious ways to
use this would be for a comment box,
for example,
on a bulletin board site or a web blog.
Many of them are limited
to plain text right now,
but with this feature you could
actually let the user do rich text
editing and submit arbitrary HTML.
[Transcript missing]
So the most basic thing here is
how to make an area editable.
And what you start out with is you
set the contenteditable property.
This is a tri-state property.
It can be set to true, false, or inherit,
depending on whether you want
the object to be editable.
You can set it just like
this as an HTML attribute,
or you can also set it on the
object through JavaScript by
saying whatever DOM element dot
contenteditable equals true.
So this is the way to
make an area editable.
You may notice I've also
put an ID attribute on it so
I can later find this div and
perform other operations on it.
Now,
one thing you want to do is if you have
a fixed size area that you want to edit,
you want it to be scrollable.
By default,
when you have an HTML element and its
contents are too big to fit inside it,
they'll just spill right
outside that area and go all
over the rest of the page.
That's not what you want.
But if you set the
overflow auto CSS property,
then automatically, once there's too much
stuff to fit in the box,
you'll get scroll bars.
Now, in addition,
that's all you need to do to
get a basic editable area.
You make it editable,
you make it overflow auto,
give it a particular size,
and you have pretty much the rich
text equivalent of a text field.
But you want to do more than that.
You want to give the user ways
to make things bold and italic.
You can create buttons like this that use
exec command to make text bold or italic.
Exec command is actually part of a
family of functions that have a whole
bunch of commands available to them.
You can look this up on the net.
This is also implemented in
Internet Explorer and Mozilla,
so you can find a lot of
docs on this sort of de facto
standard way of doing it.
And you can use it to
set in dense styles,
to start new paragraphs,
to add line breaks.
But for now, these two examples.
Now, there's other ways to use editing
commands besides just executing them.
You can use these very same
command choices to tell
whether a command is enabled,
which means,
can I apply this command right now?
Is it available as a current
choice for the selection I have?
And for bold, for example,
that would depend on having either
an editable piece of text selected
or having a blinking carrot in
the middle of some editable text.
You can also check whether the-- boy,
it's hard to read that monitor.
You can check whether the
command is currently applied to a
particular region or indeterminate,
meaning it's mixed.
You can check whether
it's supported at all,
and you can check the value,
which means what's the current state.
Now, once you've done all this editing,
you have to actually get the content out.
You can use just the innerHtml property,
which would be familiar
to many of you for that.
You just get the element using
normal DOM techniques and use the
innerHtml property to extract it.
Now, here I've shown an example of
a function you might have if
you're doing a form submission.
You might extract the HTML contents
of the element you're submitting,
place them in a hidden text field,
and then just let that
submit as part of the form.
And now we're going to demo editing in
the very same shared annotation demo.
Once again, Kevin Decker to help me out.
Okay.
So here we have our nice little stickies.
So I'm just going to type in here,
"Quick brown fox jumped over the
lazy dog." And to illustrate what
Maciej was talking about with bold,
you notice here we have bold.
We also have a button up
here we added for italicize.
So I'll just take this and go like,
"Quick brown fox." Let me select the
word "the." And we'll make that bold.
And we'll take this part
and we'll italicize it.
And there we go.
And actually,
it's really cool because not only
can you just type right there,
but it's WYSIWYG.
It's what you see is what you get.
So if I want to do something like this,
you know, copy this part,
I'll copy there and put it in this note.
And then there you go.
So anything pretty much on the page,
images, all that stuff, right there.
So there you go.
Thank you.
Next topic.
Our final topic is going
to be XmlHttpRequest.
Now, this is sort of the most abstract of
the things we're going to talk about,
sort of the least visual,
so it may require a little
explaining to explain what this
is and what really it's good for.
XmlHttpRequest is a way to talk back to
the web server without actually having
to load a page or image or anything.
You just open a direct connection,
send a request, and get the reply.
You can use it to silently make an
HTTP connection without disturbing
the user with a page or frame load.
It also offers optional
XmlSerialization if you'd like
to send XmlData to the server,
and XmlParsing if the server
again replies with Xml
that you'd like to process.
It's sort of good for behind-the-scenes
communication when you want to have some
operation in the webpage and respond
to it in some way on the server but
not sort of put it in the user's face.
and it can also be good for hooking up a
web application to an existing XML feed.
Let's look at some
diagrams of how this works.
Before XmlHttpRequest,
the way you do things is,
you start with a user action.
This makes an HTTP request to the server.
The server saves the changes,
whatever was reported by the action,
it generates a new page,
it sends an HTTP reply, and then finally,
the client shows the
results on a whole new page.
An example of a site that works like
this that you may know about is Amazon,
your shopping cart.
Whenever you remove an item
from the shopping cart,
you have to select it,
and then you have to do a save and
wait for the server to process that
and actually show you the new page.
But with XmlHttpRequest,
you can actually do
things in a better way.
You start with the user action.
Right away, you can use DOM commands
to reflect that in the UI.
And then in the background,
you use XmlHttpRequest to
make a request to the server.
Server saves the changes,
and it makes a reply.
And the client can choose whether
or not to make use of that.
One example of a website that's
already using this technique is Orkut,
a social networking site that
some of you may have heard of.
When you go to the section
where you rate your friends,
you can click from one to three
stars or whatever to rate people.
And you may have noticed
when you do that,
the page doesn't load a new page.
It just automatically saves,
but you're not disturbed at all.
And that's a great way
to set up your website.
People don't have to
wait for the page load.
You can just automatically save it.
their data.
Now, let's look into specifically how
you'd make use of XmlHttpRequest.
The first step is to create
an XmlHttpRequest object
and then start the load.
Now, the way to create an XmlHttpRequest
object is a little tricky.
There's two different techniques
depending on whether you're
using Safari or Mozilla or other
standards-based browsers or if
you're using Internet Explorer.
In Windows IE, XmlHttpRequest is actually
an ActiveX control,
so you have to use this wacky
ActiveX gobbledygook to create it.
In other browsers,
you can just directly create the object.
So this try-catch block just
encapsulates all of that.
And then you open it.
You tell it what HTTP method
to use to do the load and what
document you want to load.
So once you've kicked off this load,
you probably want to get the
data when it's actually loaded.
And here's how it goes.
You hook up a function to the
onReadyStateChange property of the
request before actually sending it.
And that works just
like an event handler.
Whenever the state
changes of the request,
whenever more data comes in or
the load kicks off or whatever,
you get an update.
And state four happens to
be I'm all done loading.
So this function just waits
until you get into state four,
and then it can just use the request.
You can also use the response
text property on the request
to get the data back out.
All right.
Now, you may want to actually
parse Xml response data.
Instead of just sending simple text
messages or looking at raw Xml,
you may want to parse it
in some interesting way.
So,
[Transcript missing]
So that's an example of how you
might use XmlHttpRequest to load
something in the background.
But what if you want to save?
Well, it's very similar.
You set up the request.
In this case, instead of a get,
I've used the post method,
just like an HTTP form post,
to post to a script,
a CGI script running on the server.
And to send,
instead of just passing null,
you can actually pass it some body data
to send as the contents of the post.
But other than that,
it's set up pretty much
the same way as a load.
Again, if you want to use XML,
then you can set up a document and
attach it to the request and send it.
Again,
instead of sending text as the body,
here we're sending a document.
We're just using normal DOM calls
to create that and build it up.
and now, let's look at a demo.
This is our little sticky app.
As you can see, like we said,
we can resize all this
and you can edit it.
But wait, there's more,
because what Maciej was alluding
to was using this XmlHttpRequest.
All this is really
saving in the background.
So, um...
So even if your browser should crash,
which Safari never really does.
Never, never happens.
So we're going to simulate
the crash with a force quit.
Yeah, just to prove there's no
smoke and mirrors going on,
we'll go ahead and crash this.
Or I mean, force quit.
You may want to use the
doc menu to force quit.
Yeah, OK, here we go.
Oh, there you go.
You have to force quit, force quit.
OK.
So, OK.
Safari actually crashed there.
Safari's gone.
And let's bring it back.
So here we go.
And there we go.
All that stuff is still there.
Saved all along, and now it's loaded when
you load the page again.
Actually, it's a little bit smaller,
but that's because when I had
this browser window open before,
I had it full-sized so
you guys can see it.
So that's actually not really a bug.
It's a feature.
There you go.
It's all saved.
It's really, really cool stuff.
Okay.
Hey, Kevin, stay up here.
Since I've gone through all my stuff
and we have a bunch of time left,
let's actually take a look
at the code of the demo.
Sure.
So why don't you just
view source on this page.
Actually, you're gonna probably
want to see the... Yeah,
you're gonna want to show
the top frame source.
The header frame.
So let's do that.
And let's make this bigger
so you guys can see it.
So let's look at what
we've actually done.
shows some examples of applying
these techniques in practice.
Here's the finished drag
move that Maciej spoke about.
So here's the drag and drop that
I talked about first with the simple
move-based drag and drop technique.
You can see all that same
stuff I talked about before.
Just the normal mouse events hooked up,
And then we've used the
same thing for resize,
which I briefly alluded to in
the talk and which we showed.
And really, you could use this drag for
any kind of way of manipulating
the elements on your page.
You can have a draggable handle and have
something else completely different move.
Okay,
find where XmlHttpRequest is in the page.
We'll look at the load and save.
Okay.
There we go.
And that's where we're doing the save,
just like I talked about,
post to a script.
Up there,
it's actually creating an Xml document.
Let's go up here.
Okay.
That's enough demo.
Isn't this cool?
I mean, this is cool stuff.
Let's go on to the summary.
Let's go to the summary.
All right, and again, XmlHttpRequest.
Apple has some docs online.
You can find them here.
All right, summary.
So we looked at all these different web
features that you can use and how you
can use them in your web application.
And you may have seen a hint of how
you can put these together to get
something that is a lot fancier than
a typical webpage and does a lot more.
We combined drag-and-drop, editing,
and XmlHttpRequest to get an
effect that's really a lot more
like a desktop app than like
what you expect from a webpage.
and you know, you can also use this stuff
for dashboard widgets.
So you may be wondering when do
you get all of these features?
Well,
they're all going to be available in
the Safari 2.0 in your Tiger WWDC seed.
They'll be available in the Safari 1.3
developer beta on Panther that's
going to be released soon.
That'll be up on the
website for download soon.
And XmlHttpRequest and LiveConnect
are actually already in Safari 1.2.
So, in closing,
let me talk a little about
the progress of Safari so far.
Let's look at a graph of
awesomeness versus time.
Now Safari 1.0 is already
pretty darn awesome.
1.1, 45% more awesome.
1.2 was 69% more awesome than that.
And 1.3 and 2.0,
who knows how awesome they
will be once they ship.
But one thing I want to mention is the
version of Safari on your TigerSeed and
the developer beta that will be coming
out soon are not the final versions yet.
Some of these new features that we've
talked about may have holes in them,
they may be buggy,
they may not be perfect,
and we'd really appreciate
it if you try them out,
give them a spin,
and report all your bugs.
And, oh yeah,
legal made me add this disclaimer.
All right,
so here's all the reference materials
we talked about during the talk.
If you want to quickly note these
down or look at them later on the DVD,
it's all the information available.